add open-unmix music separation model (#186)
pytorch/hub: sigsep_open-unmix-pytorch_umx.md

---
layout: hub_detail
background-class: hub-background
body-class: hub
category: researchers
title: Open-Unmix
summary: Reference implementation for music source separation
image: sigsep_logo_inria.png
author: Inria
tags: [audio, scriptable]
github-link: https://github.com/sigsep/open-unmix-pytorch
github-id: sigsep/open-unmix-pytorch
featured_image_1: sigsep_umx-diagram.png
featured_image_2: no-image
accelerator: cuda-optional
---

```bash
# assuming you have a PyTorch >=1.6.0 installed
pip install -q torchaudio
```

```python
import torch

# loading umxhq four target separator
separator = torch.hub.load('sigsep/open-unmix-pytorch', 'umxhq')

# audio shape (nb_samples, nb_channels, nb_timesteps)

> # assuming audio is resampled to separator.sample_rate

Reviewer: how does the user set `separator.sample_rate`? otherwise, can you provide a code snippet to resample, say with torchaudio?

Author: that was probably misleading: the user should not set `separator.sample_rate` as this is the rate the model was trained on. 

> otherwise, can you provide a code snippet to resample, say with torchaudio?

sure, what about this?

```python
resampler = torchaudio.transforms.Resample(orig_freq=rate, new_freq=separator.sample_rate, resampling_method="sinc_interpolation").to(audio.device)
audio = resampler(audio)
```

Reviewer: How about this?

```suggestion
# first resample to the sample rate of the models, separator.sample_rate
resampler = torchaudio.transforms.Resample(original_sample_rate, separator.sample_rate)
audio = resampler(audio)
```

Since Resampler only has ints/floats/strings attached to it, there shouldn't be a need for moving it explicitly to another device.

btw pytorch/audio#1402 makes the following one-line work on master: 
```python
audio = torchaudio.transforms.resample(audio, original_sample_rate, separator.sample_rate)
```
Writing the transform version as a one-line may be less readable. Thoughts?
```python
audio = torchaudio.transforms.Resample(original_sample_rate, separator.sample_rate)(audio)
```

Author: yes, I also prefer the two-liner...

> # audio shape (nb_samples, nb_channels, nb_timesteps)
> # first resample to the sample rate of the models, separator.sample_rate
> resampler = torchaudio.transforms.Resample(original_sample_rate, separator.sample_rate)
> audio = resampler(audio)
> audio = torch.rand((1, 2, 100000))
> estimates = separator(audio)
> # estimates.shape = (1, 4, 2, 100000)

Reviewer: just realized the order of the instructions would read better like this:
```suggestion
# generate random audio with shape (nb_samples, nb_channels, nb_timesteps)
audio = torch.rand((1, 2, 100_000))
original_sample_rate = 48_000

# resample to the sample rate of the models, separator.sample_rate
resampler = torchaudio.transforms.Resample(original_sample_rate, separator.sample_rate)
audio = resampler(audio)
# audio.shape = (1, 2, resampled_dim)

estimates = separator(audio)
# estimates.shape = (1, 4, 2, resampled_dim)
```
thoughts?

Author: yes, i like that. what about making the resampling optional by setting `original_sample_rate = 44_100 = separator.model_rate` and then only resample if necessary?

```python
if original_sample_rate != separator.model_rate:
    ...
```

Reviewer: That's a good point, how about simply commenting out then?
```suggestion
# generate random audio
# ... with shape (nb_samples, nb_channels, nb_timesteps)
# ... and with the same sample rate as that of the separator
audio = torch.rand((1, 2, 100_000))
original_sample_rate = separator.sample_rate

# make sure to resample the audio to models' sample rate, separator.sample_rate, if the two are different
# resampler = torchaudio.transforms.Resample(original_sample_rate, separator.sample_rate)
# audio = resampler(audio)

estimates = separator(audio)
# estimates.shape = (1, 4, 2, 100_000)
```

### Model Description

__Open-Unmix__ provides ready-to-use models that allow users to separate pop music into four stems: __vocals__, __drums__, __bass__ and the remaining __other__ instruments. The models were pre-trained on the freely available [MUSDB18](https://sigsep.github.io/datasets/musdb.html) dataset.

> Open-unmix comprises multiple models that are trained for each particular target.

Reviewer: do you mean there are multiple ways to do the separation? or one run of the separation used multiple models to do said separation?

Author: I think this sentence can be removed to make it clearer

> 
> Open-unmix comprises multiple models that are trained for each particular target.

Reviewer: ```suggestion

```

Each target model is based on a three-layer bidirectional deep LSTM. The model learns to predict the magnitude spectrogram of a target source, like vocals, from the magnitude spectrogram of a mixture input. Internally, the prediction is obtained by applying a mask on the input. The model is optimized in the magnitude domain using mean squared error.

> A `Separator` meta-model puts together multiple _Open-unmix_ spectrogram models for each desired target, and combines their output through a multichannel generalized Wiener filter, before application of inverse STFTs using `torchaudio`.

Reviewer: do you have an example for the `Separator` model since it behaves differently?

Author: thanks for the comment. Again, this wasn't clear enough on my side....

the example above, already loads a `separator` which is a joint model using wiener filtering. In contrast, users can also load the individual models and use them. 

@vincentqb do you think we should add the following snippet?

```python
# magnitude spectrogram shape (nb_samples, nb_channels, nb_bins, nb_frames)
spectrogram = torch.rand((1, 2, 100, 2049))
models = torch.hub.load('sigsep/open-unmix-pytorch', 'umxhq_spec')
separated_vocal_spectrogram = models['vocals'](spectrogram)
```

Reviewer: would this work?
```
separator = torch.hub.load('sigsep/open-unmix-pytorch', 'umxhq')
audio = torch.rand((1, 2, 100000))
estimates_vocals_only = separator["vocals"](audio)
```

Author: No, the `separator` are end-to-end time domain models (`umx`, `umxhq`, `umxse`), only `_spec` give access to the individual spectrogram models.

Instead, this is what the `targets` argument is intended for....

e.g. in the following example, only the vocal submodel is used and the wiener filtering is turned off:

```
separator = torch.hub.load('sigsep/open-unmix-pytorch', 'umxhq', targets=['vocals'], niter=0)
audio = torch.rand((1, 2, 100000))
estimates_vocals_only = separator(audio)
```

with wiener filtering, the residual source (`mix-estimate`) would need to be turned out 

```
separator = torch.hub.load('sigsep/open-unmix-pytorch', 'umxhq', targets=['vocals'], residual=True)
audio = torch.rand((1, 2, 100000))
estimates_vocals_only = separator(audio)[:, 0, ...]
```

Happy to add one of these,  what do you think @vincentqb?

Reviewer: Actually, now that I re-read the text with what you said, I don't think we need to add another example: instead, I'd just emphasize that the separator in the code example is what's referred to in the last paragraph.

> A `Separator` meta-model puts together multiple _Open-unmix_ spectrogram models for each desired target, and combines their output through a multichannel generalized Wiener filter, before application of inverse STFTs using `torchaudio`.

Reviewer: ```suggestion
A `Separator` meta-model (as shown in the code example above) puts together multiple _Open-unmix_ spectrogram models for each desired target, and combines their output through a multichannel generalized Wiener filter, before application of inverse STFTs using `torchaudio`.
```

Author: :+1: thanks
